[oneDPL] Indirectly Device Accessible Iterator Customization Point and Public Trait (#620)
uxlfoundation/oneAPI-spec: source/elements/oneDPL/source/parallel_api/iterators.rst

Reviewer: The new wording is pretty good overall, but it seems the whole page should be structured differently to make more sense. I see roughly the following structure (the final names can be different):

- Iterators (the main page header)
  - Requirements to use with device policies
    Here we describe the semantical requirements for device accessible content (without the trait and the customization) as well as device copyability
  - Special oneDPL iterators
    - The AdaptingIteratorSource requirement
    - counting_iterator
    - discard_iterator
    - etc.
      The specific conditions where the special iterators are suitable for device policies belong to these chapters, rather than separate lists.
  - Customization for user defined iterators

Author: I adjusted the structure accordingly, and distributed the rules to be with the types.

..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0

.. _iterators:

Iterators
---------

> Requirements For Iterator Use With Device Policies

Author: I've thought about this and I think the answer is "no" both both from a technical perspective and from a semantic one.

From a technical perspective, we are checking what can be passed in without any processing into SYCL kernels.  The return type of `oneapi::dpl::begin/end` requires processing to be passed into a SYCL kernel.  It is a valid input to oneDPL API, but it does require processing to convert it to an accessor during a submit call to a SYCL kernel.

From a semantic perspective, the simple answer is that it is not an iterator.  

We have to be careful not to confuse "valid inputs to oneDPL APIs" with "indirectly device accessible iterators". For instance, `std::vector::iterator` with host allocated data is also a valid input but it is not an "indirectly device accessible iterator". It is valid to use these return types of `oneapi::dpl::begin/end`  in combination with oneDPL's provided iterators, but they cannot be passed without processing into SYCL kernels.

Can the return types of `oneapi::dpl::begin/end` be used in combination with custom user iterators?  No, not without additional infrastructure, which is beyond the scope of feature I believe.

We probably need some language clarifying this...

> Requirements For Iterator Use With Device Policies

Author: Similarly, `std::vector::iterator` with host data can not be enabled for use with custom user iterators without additional infrastructure.  We would need some sort of customization point where users could provide information oneDPL would need to break an iterator down into sub-components which are all valid oneDPL API inputs.

> Requirements For Iterator Use With Device Policies

Reviewer: Ok, so it's a semantical question.

What we propose now is a "boolean" trait that for any given type can be either "true" or "false".
We say that for e.g. pointers it is "true" because we prefer to treat them as USM pointers and avoid excessive copying.
We say that for arbitrary (unknown) iterators it is "false" because we cannot guarantee the data being on the device, and conservatively prefer to take a copy.
We introduce a customizable trait for the sole reason to avoid the overhead of copying when users know that the data are accessible on the device.
Is this the semantics, or do I miss something?

If this is the semantics, then why for pseudo-iterators over the buffers the trait comes to "false"? They do not require any data copying, as SYCL implementation would take care of it. In my opinion, the semantics for buffers is closer to that of pointers than to that of unknown iterators.

> Requirements For Iterator Use With Device Policies

Author: I suppose this is one reason why the original "passed directly" naming had some benefits in that it was describing what is useful for oneDPL's implementation to actually want to know:  "Is this able to be just passed into a SYCL kernel without processing?".  

It gets a little confused with the new naming, and I understand the want to classify the return types of `oneapi::dpl::begin/end` as "indirectly device accessible", but from a technical perspective this does not provide the answer to the real question that the oneDPL implementation can use when processing inputs.  

We can have some language here that says something like: 
"While the return type of `oneapi::dpl::begin/end` is not technically an "indirectly device accessible iterator", it does not incur extra overhead beyond the normal handling of a `sycl::buffer` by the SYCL runtime." 

or, we can move back to some other naming like "passed directly".  If we mark return type of `oneapi::dpl::begin/end` as `true` here, then it stops being useful from a technical perspective.

> Requirements For Iterator Use With Device Policies

Author: Also, if we look closely at how we already define "indirectly device accessible iterator" is says the iterator type "can inherently be dereferenced on the device in a SYCL kernel".  This is not true of return type of `oneapi::dpl::begin/end`.  We explicitly state in the spec that that the return type of `oneapi::dpl::begin/end`  "cannot be used as iterators in other contexts, including dereference".

> Requirements For Iterator Use With Device Policies

Reviewer: @danhoeflinger you look at it from the background of the current oneDPL implementation and its needs, while I am trying to look at it from a more abstract, usage-centric view point (in a broad sense of usage like a contract between implementors and users of the library). That's why I push to move away from the implementation-centric "passed directly" paradigm.

Whoever calls our algorithms, does not care how the "iterators" are passed onto the device and if they are dereferenced there or not. That is honestly implementation details, for as long as algorithms process the data. Whether the data are copied before processing and then back or not, however, can be, and I think should be, considered as a part of the contract, because it directly impacts performance and so usage experience.

Therefore it makes sense for me that the trait answers the question whether a oneDPL implementation will be able to avoid excessive data copying for my special iterators or not. But if that's not the question we want the trait to answer, then what is the real question, which would make sense as part of the library contract, and not an implementation detail?

> Requirements For Iterator Use With Device Policies

Author: I think the real question is: 
"Can this type be inherently be dereferenced on the device in a SYCL kernel"?

It just so happens that oneDPL makes use of this trait to avoid excessive data copying, but that is not what the trait explicitly means.  We could make a different trait if users are curious about if a type will require a copy into a `sycl::buffer` on its way into a SYCL kernel.  `template<typename Iter>requires_copy_to_sycl_buffer_in_device_policies[_v]` or something like that.

> Requirements For Iterator Use With Device Policies

Reviewer: Yet in the implementation we imply that if it cannot be dereferenced then we need to copy the data - except if it's the "buffer position type" which we cannot dereference but should not copy either. Does not sound like a proper implication to me.

The proper implications, I think, would be these:
If a type represents a data sequence/range that is either accessible on the device or generated there on the fly, then:
- the implementation should not take an extra step of data copying;
- if the type is also device copyable, it can be passed as the argument to a SYCL kernel;
  - otherwise, the implementation should somehow obtain a different representation of the data sequence/range that can be passed in.
- and if the type is also dereferenceable (including with operator[]), it can be used directly in the kernel;
  - otherwise, the implementation should access data in some different manner.

So do you say that the trait should only be true if all three conditions are satisfied, or the first and the last because for device copyability we have a different trait?

I think that it would be sufficient for the trait to answer just the first question, which for the user types we (the library implementors) cannot really answer in any other way. But we certainly can say whether a type is device copyable (by checking the corresponding SYCL trait) and we can say if it is dereferenceable (e.g. by simply requiring that it's a random access iterator, which by the standard is mandated to have `operator[]`).

representing content that is accessible on the device within a SYCL kernel. "Indirectly device accessible iterators"
are iterators that can inherently be dereferenced on the device within a SYCL kernel.

Examples of "indirectly device accessible" iterators include SYCL USM shared or device memory, or iterator types like
``counting_iterator`` or ``discard_iterator`` that do not require any data to be copied to the device to be used in a
SYCL kernel. An example of an iterator type that is not "indirectly device accessible" is a ``std::vector`` iterator
with a host allocator, which requires the data to be copied to the device in some way before usage in a SYCL kernel
within algorithms used with a ``device_policy``.

:doc:`*buffer position objects* <buffer_wrappers>` returned by ``oneapi::dpl::begin`` and ``oneapi::dpl::end`` are not
iterators, but they are "indirectly device accessible" because they represent data that is accessible on the device.
When using oneDPL algorithms with a ``device_policy``, "indirectly device accessible" types avoid unnecessary data
movement when provided as input or output arguments.

> "Indirectly device accessible iterators" must also be SYCL device-copyable to be used as input or output for oneDPL

Reviewer 2: Do we also want to explicitly require that they must be random access here? In the current proposed implementation this is a requirement.

Author: I changed this section, but I do now mention random access iterator specifically

An example of *indirectly device accessible iterators* include SYCL USM shared pointers which can inherently be used in
a SYCL kernel. An example of an iterator type that is not *indirectly device accessible* is a random access iterator
referring to host allocated data because dereferencing it within a SYCL kernel would result in undefined behavior.

:doc:`*buffer position objects* <buffer_wrappers>` returned by ``oneapi::dpl::begin`` and ``oneapi::dpl::end`` are not
iterators. However, they are *indirectly device accessible* because they represent data accessible on the device.

When passed to oneDPL algorithms with a ``device_policy``, *indirectly device accessible iterator* types that are also
random access iterators and satisfy *SYCL device-copyable* must not cause unnecessary data movement beyond what is
required by the algorithm's semantics and what would be required to use the type directly within a SYCL kernel.
*Indirectly device accessible* *buffer position objects* must not cause unnecessary data movement beyond what is
required by the algorithm's semantics and what would be required by using an accessor to the buffer within a SYCL
kernel.

> Public Trait: ``oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible[_v]``
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indirect Device Accessibility Trait
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

The following class template and variable template are defined in ``<oneapi/dpl/iterator>`` inside the namespace
``oneapi::dpl``:

.. code:: cpp

    template <typename T>
    struct is_indirectly_device_accessible{ /* see below */ };

    template <typename T>
    inline constexpr bool is_indirectly_device_accessible_v = is_indirectly_device_accessible<T>::value;

``template <typename T> oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible`` is a type which has the base characteristic

> of ``std::true_type`` if ``T`` is *indirectly device accessible*, otherwise it has the base characteristic of

Author: taken

..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0

.. _iterators:

Iterators
---------

Requirements For Iterator Use With Device Policies
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Iterators and iterator-like types may or may not refer to content accessible on the device. The term *indirectly device
> accessible* refers to a type that represents content accessible on the device within a `SYCL`_ kernel. *Indirectly
> device accessible iterators* are iterators that can inherently be dereferenced on the device within a SYCL kernel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Iterators and iterator-like types may or may not refer to content accessible within a `SYCL`_ kernel on a device.
The term *indirectly device accessible* refers to a type that represents content accessible on a device.
An *indirectly device accessible iterator* is such a type that can also be dereferenced within a SYCL kernel.
```

Examples of *indirectly device accessible iterators* include SYCL USM shared or device memory pointers, as well as
iterator types like ``counting_iterator`` or ``discard_iterator``, which can inherently be used in a SYCL kernel. An
example of an iterator type that is not *indirectly device accessible* is a ``std::vector`` iterator with a host

> allocator, as it cannot inherently be used in a SYCL kernel.

Reviewer: These examples seem mostly redundant, because the same information is provided below. Perhaps one example would be enough to illustrate the introduced terms.

Author: I can reduce the number mentioned here, but I think there are probably 4 important categories to call out in this introduction, and I think all are useful to introduce the concept. 

1) iterator with no data (generates on the fly)
2) iterator with device accessible data
3) iterator with only host accessible data
4) buffer wrapper (indirectly device accessible but not iterator)

I could be convinced to drop (1), since we have those on this same page.

Reviewer: I tend to think these examples belongs to the developer guide rather than the specification.
(4) is OK as a requirement, not an example. (3) I would also drop, or perhaps combine with (2) - for example, `std::vector` with a USM allocator has an iterator that is indirectly device accessible, bit not with a host allocator.

Reviewer: Though maybe `std::vector` with USM allocator is bad for an example, as we do not want to have an impression that it is guaranteed to work efficiently.

Author: I cut it down to one positive and one negative example.  If we want to just remove this paragraph we can, and just rely upon the definition and rules below.

iterators. However, they are indirectly device accessible because they represent data accessible on the device.

When passed to oneDPL algorithms with a ``device_policy``, indirectly device accessible iterator types that are also
random access iterators and satisfy *SYCL device-copyable* must not cause unnecessary data movement beyond what is
required by the algorithm's semantics and what would be required to use the type directly within a SYCL kernel.
Indirectly device accessible buffer position objects must not cause unnecessary data movement beyond what is
required by the algorithm's semantics and what would be required by using an accessor to the buffer within a SYCL
kernel.

Indirect Device Accessibility Type Trait
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following class template and variable template are defined in ``<oneapi/dpl/iterator>`` inside the namespace
``oneapi::dpl``:

.. code:: cpp

    template <typename T>
    struct is_indirectly_device_accessible{ /* see below */ };

    template <typename T>
    inline constexpr bool is_indirectly_device_accessible_v = is_indirectly_device_accessible<T>::value;

> ``template <typename T> oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible`` is a type which has the base characteristic

Author: https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneAPI-spec/pull/622

operators of ``counting_iterator`` behave as if applied to the values of Integral type
representing the counters of the iterator instances passed to the operators.

> ``counting_iterator`` are SYCL device-copyable, and are "device accessible content iterators".

Reviewer 3: I was fine with keeping "always for `counting_iterator` and `discard_iterator` (I think I wrote something like "iterator below". But how it's right now is also good. Please keep it as is.

I have another suggestion somewhere you use "`<iterator_name>` are" and somewhere "`<iterator_name>` is". I propose to align to "is" everywhere
```suggestion
``counting_iterator`` is SYCL device-copyable, and are "device accessible content iterators".
```

Author: adjusted all of these "are" -> "is" [a]

of ``discard_iterator`` behave as if applied to integer counter values maintained by the
iterator instances to determine their position relative to each other.

> ``discard_iterator`` are SYCL device-copyable, and are "device accessible content iterators".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``discard_iterator`` is SYCL device-copyable, and are "device accessible content iterators".
```

Author: adjusted all of these "are" -> "is" [a]

to index into the value set defined by the source iterator. The resulting lvalue is returned
as the result of the operator.

> ``permutation_iterator`` are SYCL device-copyable if both the ``SourceIterator`` and the ``IndexMap``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``permutation_iterator`` is SYCL device-copyable if both the ``SourceIterator`` and the ``IndexMap``
```

Author: adjusted all of these "are" -> "is" [a]

Author: adjusted all of these "are" -> "is" [a]

> are SYCL device-copyable, and are always "device accessible content iterators" if both the ``SourceIterator``

Author: removed all instances of this.

to index into the value set defined by the source iterator. The resulting lvalue is returned
as the result of the operator.

``permutation_iterator`` is SYCL device-copyable if both the ``SourceIterator`` and the ``IndexMap``
are SYCL device-copyable. ``permutation_iterator`` is *indirectly device accessible* if both the
``SourceIterator`` and the ``IndexMap`` are *indirectly device accessible*.

When using ``permutation_iterator`` in combination with an algorithm with a ``device_policy``, ``SourceIterator`` must

> be *indirectly device accessible*.

Reviewer 2: For our other iterator adaptors, we state that the source iterator must satisfy `AdaptingIteratorSource`. Should we say the same here for `SourceIterator`?

Author: We do say that, but it is a few paragraphs above.  It is odd though that there is so much separation between requirements of the same component iterator. I'll try to group them together.

Reviewer 2: I missed it originally. The grouping is a good improvement.

source iterator itself. The template type ``Iterator`` must satisfy
``AdaptingIteratorSource``.

``transform_iterator`` is SYCL device-copyable if the source iterator is SYCL device-copyable, and

> is "indirectly device accessible iterator" if the source iterator is an "indirectly device accessible iterators".

Author: fixed, as well as some others.

``make_zip_iterator`` constructs and returns an instance of ``zip_iterator``
using the set of source iterators provided.

.. _iterators-passed-directly:

> Customization Point for "Passed Directly" Iterators

Author: My current local draft uses iterators referring to "device accessible content".  I think its an improvement in clarity (though slightly more verbose).  I'm working out some details, but will push today.

content rather than data to include things like `counting_iterator` / `discard_iterator`.

> Customization Point for "Passed Directly" Iterators

Author: See if the newest changes help with this.  I think we can tweak the language a bit as necessary, but this frames it based upon the characteristics of the iterator / data rather than the implementation detail of what does or doesn't happen as a result.

"passed directly" to SYCL kernels, or alternatively returns a type with the characteristics of ``std::false_type``
otherwise. The function must be defined in one of the valid search locations for ADL lookup, which includes the
namespace of the definition of the iterator type ``IteratorT``.

The function ``is_passed_directly_in_onedpl_device_policies`` is used by oneDPL to determine whether the iterator type
should be "passed directly" to SYCL kernels by interrogating its return type at compile time only. It shall not be
called by oneDPL outside a ``decltype`` context to determine the return type. This means that overloads may be provided
as forward declarations only, without a body defined. ADL lookup is used to determine which function overload to use
according to the rules in the C++ Standard. Therefore, derived iterator types without an overload for their exact type
will match their most specific base iterator type if such an overload exists.

The default implementation of ``is_passed_directly_in_onedpl_device_policies`` marks the following iterators as
"passed directly":
* Pointers (to handle USM pointers)

> * Iterators with the ``using is_passed_directly = std::true_type`` trait

Author: We likely want to remove this from the official specification, even if we choose to include this in our implementation (possibly temporarily).  
Including this would be to support any existing code relying upon an existing unspecified feature.  Any code relying on this can instead update to rely upon this specified feature.

Author: I've removed this.

``make_zip_iterator`` constructs and returns an instance of ``zip_iterator``
using the set of source iterators provided.

.. _iterators-device-accessible:

> Customization For User Defined Iterators

Reviewer: What should we do with standard iterator adaptor types that we (would like to) support? `reverse_iterator`, `const_iterator`, `move_iterator`, maybe `counted_iterator`, as well as the iterators for supported C++ view types?

We might say nothing in the spec and leave it to the implementation, or we might claim these types as conditionally device accessible, similar to our iterator adaptors.

Author: `reverse_iterator` is covered both in the spec language in the default overload of the customization point and by the implementation.

Should we comment on `counted_iterator`(c++20) or `const_iterator`(c++23) with c++17 as our support baseline outside of the ranges API (for which this feature is not relevant)?

I don't have a good answer for `move_iterator` (or counted, const) other than they aren't currently supported by oneDPL's current implementation processing inputs in preparation for SYCL kernels (to the best of my knowledge).

Reviewer: > reverse_iterator is covered both in the spec language in the default overload of the customization point and by the implementation.

It's covered in a somewhat strange way. To me, it is strange that the specification talks about "the default implementation". It might describe the required implementation for an arbitrary argument type (in our case, the default is set to "false_type") and required specializations for other types, such as `reverse_iterator`.

> Should we comment on counted_iterator(c++20) or const_iterator(c++23) with c++17 as our support baseline outside of the ranges API (for which this feature is not relevant)?

It's not about versions of the standard, it's about whether we want the specification to require certain behavior for these types (when they are available) or not. Or, putting it differently, C++17 is the minimal version of the standard but not the only one - so the standard APIs available in later versions still can be considered.

Author: We can change the way we describe this by saying the default is `std::false_type`, and then describe pointers and `reverse_iterators` and other iterator adaptors separately.

Author: I suppose the question for `const_iterator`, `move_iterator`, maybe `counted_iterator` is whether we want to add mention of general support for these iterators in the context of this feature, or if we want to treat that as a separate change.  

From the specification perspective, I'm not sure. From the implementation perspective, it may either put at risk the implementation of this feature landing in the upcoming milestone or put us out of step with the specification if we defer that specific functionality for later. It seems like it shouldn't be difficult, but without more exploration, I can't say.

Author: Ok, sounds good.  I can make an issue to explore support for these iterator adaptors in oneDPL.  I can also adjust the language to discuss `reverse_iterator` on its own rather than in the default implementation section.

Author: I've added a section to describe characteristics of `std::reverse_iterator` and USM pointers. We can add to this section later.

However, I do think it still makes sense to describe them in the context of the default implementation.  These types won't have their own ADL overload because a pointer is a built-in type and without knowledge of `std::reverse_iterator` implementation details we can't create an ADL overload safely in the `std` namespace.

Reviewer: Let's clear the terms. The default implementation of the trait or the default implementation of the library?
For the first, a specialization for a certain type is by definition not a default implementation.
For the second, in which sense a library implementation would be "default", especially from the specification standpoint? :)

Author: Sorry, default overload for ADL base customization point.  At compile time it checks the type and sets its return type accordingly.

Reviewer: The "default overload of the customization point" is an implementation detail in my opinion. Unless I miss something, such an overload does not have to exist.

Author: With a separate section for these other iterators, I've removed the implementation details about how it would be implemented.  
You are correct, the important thing is that we set out the semantic rules, and whether we implement them as a default ADL overload or the specialization of a trait doesn't belong here.

``make_zip_iterator`` constructs and returns an instance of ``zip_iterator``
using the set of source iterators provided.

.. _iterators-device-accessible:

Customization For User Defined Iterators
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

oneDPL provides a mechanism to indicate whether custom iterators are "device accessible content iterators" by defining
an Argument-Dependent Lookup (ADL) customization point, ``is_onedpl_device_accessible_content_iterator``. oneDPL also
defines a public trait, ``is_device_accessible_content_iterator[_v]`` to indicate whether an iterator is a "device
accessible content iterator".

oneDPL queries this information at compile time to determine how to handle iterator types when they are passed to
algorithms with a ``device_policy`` to avoid unnecessary data movement.

ADL Customization Point: ``is_onedpl_device_accessible_content_iterator``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A free function ``is_onedpl_device_accessible_content_iterator(IteratorT)`` may be defined, which accepts an argument

> of type ``IteratorT`` and returns a type with the characteristics of ``std::true_type`` if ``IteratorT`` refers to

Reviewer: > However, std::conjunction might not have `std::true_type` or `std::false_type` characteristics at all.

If it is used with `true_type`/`false_type` or derivatives, it will:
> The specialization `std::conjunction<B1, ..., BN>` has a public and unambiguous base that is
> - if `sizeof...(B) == 0`, `std::true_type`;
> - otherwise the first type Bi in B1, ..., BN for which `bool(Bi::value) == false`, or BN if there is no such type.

 And that's exactly our goal I believe.

> of type ``IteratorT`` and returns a type with the characteristics of ``std::true_type`` if ``IteratorT`` refers to

Author: I suppose I don't know exactly what we mean by "characteristics of `std::true_type`" if a `std::conjunction` or similar types will not qualify.

> of type ``IteratorT`` and returns a type with the characteristics of ``std::true_type`` if ``IteratorT`` refers to

Reviewer: > I suppose I don't know exactly what we mean by "characteristics of std::true_type" if a std::conjunction or similar types will not qualify.

The wording "with a base characteristic of" is used in a few places in the C++ standard, for example in https://eel.is/c++draft/meta.unary:
>Subclause [meta.unary] contains templates that may be used to query the properties of a type at compile time.
> Each of these templates shall be a Cpp17UnaryTypeTrait **with a base characteristic of true_type if the corresponding condition is true, otherwise false_type**.

My understanding of this wording is like: even though it is not a true_type or false_type, it has all the same characteristics as these types and can be used as such. Practically it most often means that the trait class inherits either true_type or false_type (maybe indirectly).

In my comment above, I say that std::conjunction will also fall into this category if the chosen template parameter does that. And though the standard does not prohibit to use other types with `std::conjunction`, the typical arguments it is used with will be traits etc. classes that inherit `bool_constant`. Therefore requiring that the return type of our ADL customization function should have these characteristics does not preclude the use of `std::conjunction`, but limits what types can be passed to it.

> of type ``IteratorT`` and returns a type with the characteristics of ``std::true_type`` if ``IteratorT`` refers to

Author: Is see, thanks for the clarification.  I think I agree that our current formulation makes sense then, with a small tweak to the language perhaps to follow the example language you provided. 

Unless we have a compelling example to allow `conjunction` `disjunction` `negation` which use something other than types with the base characteristic of a `bool_constant`, I think simplicity is better.

> of type ``IteratorT`` and returns a type with the characteristics of ``std::true_type`` if ``IteratorT`` refers to

Author: To follow up here, I've adjusted the language slightly, but think this simple version is best without making it more broad. I've not been able to come up with any real compelling case for `conjunction` or `disjunction` of an `integral_constant` which is not a `bool_constant` worth making this language more complex.

However, I think a valid implementation could easily accommodate arbitrary usage of `conjunction` and `disjunction`, ensuring that the public trait is always a `bool_constant`.

> "device accessible content", or alternatively returns a type with the characteristics of ``std::false_type``

Author: taken.

otherwise. The function must be defined in one of the valid search locations for ADL lookup, which includes the

> namespace of the definition of the iterator type ``IteratorT``.

Author: Taken, I removed the second part.  It doesn't really make sense after the edit.  Its more something for the documentation than the spec.

The function ``is_onedpl_device_accessible_content_iterator`` may be used by oneDPL to determine if the iterator refers
to "device accessible content" by interrogating its return type at compile-time only. It shall not be called by oneDPL

> outside a ``decltype`` context to determine the return type. Overloads may be provided as forward declarations only,

Author: Well, it justifies the technical reason that "Overloads may be provided as forward declarations only,...", but perhaps its just enough to say that.  I've removed it.

> outside a ``decltype`` context to determine the return type. Overloads may be provided as forward declarations only,

Reviewer 3: Yes, but the thing about `decltype` is that it makes allowed use-cases broader. So, users are allowed to provide both declarations and `constexpr` definitions. If it would narrow the use-cases It would have made a perfect sense to me.

With the current design I am glad that you decided to remove it.

> outside a ``decltype`` context to determine the return type. Overloads may be provided as forward declarations only,

Author: I don't think I understand this most recent comment. As it stands, users are able to provide either declarations or  full definitions.  As we discussed offline previously, return type must be knowable at compile-time regardless of what is marked as `constexpr` or not, so any implementation for which that isn't the case will have errors anyway.

I'm not understanding why knowing the `decltype` thing actually changes anything other than "Overloads may be provided as forward declarations only...", other than giving some insight into why that is the case technically.

Can you help me understand with an example of something allowed for a user in with this `decltype` knowledge which isn't allowed with the current language?

> without a body defined. ADL lookup is used to determine which function overload to use according to the rules in the

Author: taken

`C++ Standard`_. Therefore, derived iterator types without an overload for their exact type will match their most
specific base iterator type if such an overload exists.

The default implementation of ``is_onedpl_device_accessible_content_iterator`` marks the following iterators as to
"device accessible content iterators":
* Pointers (to handle USM pointers)

> * Iterators to USM shared allocated ``std::vector``-s when the allocator type is knowable from the iterator type

Author: In practice, with a good amount of certainty with some compilers, yes. However, its a good question if its worth mentioning in the specification, since it is not always knowable.
https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDPL/pull/1438#issuecomment-1989312899
https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDPL/pull/1438#issuecomment-2032850867

How it looks in the oneDPL's implementation currently:
https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDPL/blob/1625f6a2dcc981a537c65fdc3b40951cb63b7326/include/oneapi/dpl/pstl/hetero/dpcpp/sycl_iterator.h#L154-L179

> * Iterators to USM shared allocated ``std::vector``-s when the allocator type is knowable from the iterator type

Reviewer: Think of that as of specification, not as of documentation.
If we want to require that `std::vector` with USM allocators is used without excessive copying, then it is a part of the spec. Otherwise, it can be mentioned as an implementation-specific or completely omitted.

> * Iterators to USM shared allocated ``std::vector``-s when the allocator type is knowable from the iterator type

Author: In practice, oneDPL's implementation is relying upon standard library implementation details which are not part of the C++ standard library specification of `std::vector::iterator` to enable handling of usm allocator vector iterators when it can confidently guess that the allocator type is knowable from the iterator type.  From purely the C++ standard specification, I don't think it is possible to definitively know anything about the allocator from the type of a `std::vector::iterator`. 

In practice, it would be quite unlikely that a standard library implementation could / would have a `std::vector::iterator` type which "tricks" the current oneDPL implementation's detection of a knowable "USM shared allocator", but I do think you could technically contrive such an implementation if you really wanted to.

From a specification perspective, it doesn't belong, I think.

> * Iterators to USM shared allocated ``std::vector``-s when the allocator type is knowable from the iterator type

Author: I've removed the line for now, but I'm open to discussion of course.

> * Iterators to USM shared allocated ``std::vector``-s when the allocator type is knowable from the iterator type

Reviewer 3: Yeah, if we speak about `Allocator` we should write an iterator type slightly differently: `std::vector<T, Allocator>::iterator`.

As you can see `Allocator` is a part of specialized `vector` type, not an `iterator` type. I don't know a way in C++ do deduce a outer type by inner type: in this concrete example: decude `vector<T, Allocator>` type from nested `iterator` type

* ``std::reverse_iterator<IteratorT>`` when ``IteratorT`` refers to "device accessible content"

> Public Trait: ``oneapi::dpl::is_device_accessible_content_iterator[_v]``

Reviewer 3: naming suggestions to consider

- `is_passed_directly_to_device` (perhaps obsolete)
- `is_device_accessible_iterator`
- `is_indirectly_device_accessible`

For the last one it might be `is_device_indirectly_accessible`; not sure what is more accurate from English perspective. But the last proposed option (by me) is my favorite, so far. It also corelates with several C++20 concepts, e.g., `indirectly_writable`

Author: I don't really like `is_device_accessible_iterator` because I think there is a difference between the iterator being accessible and its content it refers to being accessible.  However, `is_indirectly_device_accessible` is more clear and concise than what is currently in the PR.

Reviewer: I am fine with `is_indirectly_device_accessible`, but we need to get feedback from the customers.

Author: I adjusted the name here in the spec.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The public trait ``oneapi::dpl::is_device_accessible_content_iterator[_v]`` can be used to query whether an iterator
is a "device accessible content iterator". The trait is defined in ``<oneapi/dpl/iterator>``.

> ``oneapi::dpl::is_device_accessible_content_iterator<T>`` evaluates to a type with the characteristics of

Author: Adjusted to be close to your proposal.

``std::true_type`` if ``T``  refers to "device accessible content", otherwise it evaluates to a type with the
characteristics of ``std::false_type``.

> ``oneapi::dpl::is_device_accessible_content_iterator<T>`` is a ``constexpr bool`` that evaluates to ``true`` if ``T``

Author: Rearranged so that this description is just in the code.

refers to "device accessible content", otherwise it evaluates to ``false``.

Example
^^^^^^^

> The following example shows how to define a ADL overload for a simple user defined iterator.  It also shows an example
> for a more complicated case which uses a hidden friend to provide the ADL overload within the definition of the
> iterator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to define a customization for `is_device_accessible_content_iterator` trait for a simple user defined iterator.  It also shows a more complicated example where the customization is defined as a hidden friend of the iterator class.
```

Author: taken.

forward declarations only, without a body defined. ADL is used to determine which function overload to use according to
the rules in the `C++ Standard`_. Therefore, derived iterator types without an overload for their exact type will match
their most specific base iterator type if such an overload exists.

The default implementation of ``is_onedpl_device_accessible_content_iterator`` marks the following iterators as to
"device accessible content iterators":
* Pointers (to handle USM pointers)
* ``std::reverse_iterator<IteratorT>`` when ``IteratorT`` refers to "device accessible content"

Public Trait: ``oneapi::dpl::is_device_accessible_content_iterator[_v]``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following class template and variable template are defined in ``<oneapi/dpl/iterator>`` inside the namespace
``oneapi::dpl``:

.. code:: cpp

    template <typename T>
    struct is_device_accessible_content_iterator{ /* see below */ };

    template <typename T>
    inline constexpr bool is_device_accessible_content_iterator_v = is_device_accessible_content_iterator<T>::value;

> ``template <typename T> oneapi::dpl::is_device_accessible_content_iterator<T>`` evaluates to a type with the 
> characteristics of ``std::true_type`` if ``T``  refers to "device accessible content", otherwise it evaluates to a type
> with the characteristics of ``std::false_type``.

Reviewer 3: I would still recommend some improvements
```suggestion
``is_device_accessible_content_iterator`` has characteristics of ``std::true_type`` if ``T``  refers to "device accessible content", otherwise it has characteristics of ``std::false_type``.
```
If you want to keep `template <typename T>` at the beginning, that's probably fine (though, looks redundant) but please at least remove `<T>` after class name. Also, "evaluates to a type" sounds a little bit clunky to me.

Author: fixed.

Example
^^^^^^^

The following example shows how to define a customization for `is_device_accessible_content_iterator` trait for a simple
user defined iterator.  It also shows a more complicated example where the customization is defined as a hidden friend
of the iterator class.

.. code:: cpp

    namespace usr
    {
        struct accessible_it
        {

>         /* unspecified user definition of a iterator which refers to "device accessible content" */

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            /* unspecified user definition of a iterator which refers to "device accessible content" */
```

Author: fixed.

``make_zip_iterator`` constructs and returns an instance of ``zip_iterator``
using the set of source iterators provided.

Other Supported Iterators
+++++++++++++++++++++++++
``std::reverse_iterator<IteratorT>`` is an ``AdaptingIteratorSource`` if ``IteratorT`` is an ``AdaptingIteratorSource``.
``std::reverse_iterator<IteratorT>`` is an *indirectly device accessible iterator* if ``IteratorT`` is an *indirectly
device accessible iterator*. The SYCL device-copyable requirement of ``std::reverse_iterator<IteratorT>`` for use in
algorithms with a ``device_policy`` relies upon the trivial copyability of ``IteratorT`` and the specific implementation
of ``std::reverse_iterator``. 

Pointers are assumed to be USM shared or device memory pointers and are *indirectly device accessible*.
Pointers are trivially copyable and therefore SYCL device-copyable.

.. _iterators-device-accessible:

Customization For User Defined Iterators
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
oneDPL provides a mechanism to indicate whether custom iterators are *indirectly device accessible*.

Applications may define a free function ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible(T)``, which accepts an argument of

> type ``T`` and returns a type with the base characteristic of ``std::true_type`` if ``T`` is *indirectly device accessible*,
> otherwise returns a type with the base characteristic of ``std::false_type``. The function must be discoverable by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
type ``T`` and returns a type with the base characteristic of ``std::true_type`` if ``T`` is *indirectly device accessible*.
Otherwise, it returns a type with the base characteristic of ``std::false_type``. The function must be discoverable by
```
Small grammatical suggestion.

Author: Taken.

argument-dependent lookup (ADL). It may be provided as a forward declaration only, without defining a body.

The return type of ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible`` is examined at compile time to determine if ``T`` is
*indirectly device accessible*. The function overload to use must be selected with argument-dependent lookup.
[*Note*: Therefore, according to the rules in the `C++ Standard`_, a derived type for which there is no
function overload will match its most specific base type for which an overload exists. -- *end note*]

Once ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible(T)`` is defined, the public trait
``template<typename T> oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible[_v]`` will return the appropriate value. This public
trait can also be used to define the return type of ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible(T)`` by applying it to any 
source iterator component types. Refer to the example below.

Example
^^^^^^^

> The following example shows how to define a customization for `is_indirectly_device_accessible` trait for a simple

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to define a customization for ``is_indirectly_device_accessible`` trait for a simple
```
At least in the GitHub preview, this is needed to get the correct formatting.

Author: thanks, taken.

``std::reverse_iterator<IteratorT>`` is an *indirectly device accessible iterator* if ``IteratorT`` is an *indirectly
device accessible iterator*. The SYCL device-copyable requirement of ``std::reverse_iterator<IteratorT>`` for use in
algorithms with a ``device_policy`` relies upon the trivial copyability of ``IteratorT`` and the specific implementation
of ``std::reverse_iterator``. 

Pointers are assumed to be USM shared or device memory pointers and are *indirectly device accessible*.
Pointers are trivially copyable and therefore SYCL device-copyable.

.. _iterators-device-accessible:

Customization For User Defined Iterators
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
oneDPL provides a mechanism to indicate whether custom iterators are *indirectly device accessible*.

Applications may define a free function ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible(T)``, which accepts an argument of
type ``T`` and returns a type with the base characteristic of ``std::true_type`` if ``T`` is *indirectly device accessible*,
otherwise returns a type with the base characteristic of ``std::false_type``. The function must be discoverable by

> argument-dependent lookup (ADL). It may be provided as a forward declaration only, without defining a body.
> The return type of ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible`` is examined at compile time to determine if ``T`` is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
argument-dependent lookup (ADL). It may be provided as a forward declaration only, without defining a body.

The return type of ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible`` is examined at compile time to determine if ``T`` is
```

Looks like in previous suggestions I accidentally removed a space line; better to get it back.

specific base iterator type if such an overload exists.

Once ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible(T)`` is defined, the public trait
``template<typename T> oneapi::dpl::is_indirectly_device_accessible[_v]`` will return the appropriate value. This public
trait can also be used to define the return type of ``is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible(T)`` by applying it to any 
source iterator component types. Refer to the example below.

Example
^^^^^^^

The following example shows how to define a customization for `is_indirectly_device_accessible` trait for a simple
user defined iterator.  It also shows a more complicated example where the customization is defined as a hidden friend
of the iterator class.

.. code:: cpp

    namespace usr
    {
        struct accessible_it
        {
            /* unspecified user definition of a *indirectly device accessible iterator" */
        };

        std::true_type
        is_onedpl_indirectly_device_accessible(accessible_it);

        struct inaccessible_it
        {
            /* unspecified user definition of iterator  which is not "indirectly device accessible" */
        };

>         // The following could be omitted. The default overload would provide the same result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // The following could be omitted, as returning std::false_type matches the default behavior.
```
